If you're really able to understand the
importance of planning to this kind of community,
to this community, and how we as planners have
handled it, I don't need to dwell on the
transportation plan. I think it's very obvious to
everyone why we approved the transportation
plan, and we used that as a way to carry forth our
planning process, but we haven't always done
that. The planners under the direction of Kern
Ewing and other persons who have succeeded Kern
have made a very honest and diligent effort to
press the city management and city council into
allowing us to develop another comprehensive
plan, something that will be acceptable and
adoptable by the city government of Corpus
Christi, meaning its city council. Who were some
of these other people? with the demise of Kern
Ewing and Linus Jameson and of the entire
community renewal program itself. What happened
to Kern Ewing? Kern had left. He had worked himself
into it. He was a very highly principled planner.
He didn't compromise his principles very much,
regardless of the pressures that were put on him.
And I think Kern, like a lot of idealistic persons
that are highly principled, also didn't realize
the difficulty that our administration was in in
pursuing a comprehensive plan. Let me just say, I
think it was just by mutual agreement it would be
better. It was both best for the city of Corpus
Christi and best for Kern that he resign. And he
did. And everyone who has resigned from our office
has generally gone to a better job. Kern had gone
to, he became the director of planning for Bob
Armstrong in the state land office after he left
Corpus. And so it was great. Linus Jameson then
assumed the title under the reorganization. as a
senior planner. And then who were some of the other
staff planners who were leading the city council
to ask very serious questions about community
improvement? Well, I think the only one seriously
who took a very active role in doing that, at least
through the planning commission, was Mr. Bruce
McClendon. Bruce McClendon was a senior planner.
hired by Mr. Winger, or Mr. Anderson, and worked in
the planning department. An extremely capable
person. Bruce was not within our community
renewal function. Very quick, let me tell you what
happened, and I feel I can get my date straight. I
think it was around late 1974, early 75. city
manager decided that he wanted to reorganize,
Mark Towns, reorganize the city government. And
at that time, they decided to create one of the
super departments, or four super departments,
for the purpose of reducing the number of people
who actually, who had to deal with the city manager
directly. Although, you know, before he had to
have to work with everyone on a one-to-one basis.
And Mr. Towns' type of management at that time was,
to do everything, to supervise everything, to
personally sign off on everything, even from
hiring people at lower grades, lower grade
people, to personally signing off on all
subdivision things and all zoning actions and
recommendations. And for that reason, Mr.
Townsend worked from 8 o'clock in the morning to
midnight every night. And he usually worked seven
days a week.
Under the reorganization, the Community Renewal
Program phased out and we phased in, of course the
money was phasing out too, we phased in the 701
Planning Program, which Linus Jameson came in
charge of. That became the long-range planning
division of the Department of Planning. And also
in that reorganization, it made Mr. Jonas Briones
the Director of Planning and Urban Development.
Mr. Anderson, who was already at retirement age,
if he had chose to stay on, would have been the
Director of Intergovernmental Affairs. And that
job simply would have been coordinating about
city activities with other governmental
jurisdictions. Mr. Anderson decided at that time
that he would rather retire.
And he went from there. He moved into, which I'm
sure you're aware of now, consulting work, not on a
full-time basis, but part-time, and he was
associated with Harlem Bartholomew in the
consulting office he set up down here. Under the
leadership of Mr. Briones, who is, I don't really
consider Mr. Briones anti-planning. I hear a lot
of people say that he is, but he's not. But one of the
things that Mr. Briones wanted to emphasize since
Kern left, Kern never joined us over here, He
resigned before the changeover took place. We
physically moved our offices from the center of
downtown over to the present city hall. And we had
long-range planning and we had current planning.
And I was in the long-range planning still just as a
planner. And one of the things that had happened in
that transition, too, is that In 1974, the city
just had rejected by the Department of
Transportation, Urban Mass Transportation
Administration, an application for purchase of
new buses. It was a Section 3 capital grant. And the
reason it was rejected is because the Department
of Transportation had extended its planning
requirements to cover transit operations and
required that prior to awarding any capital
grants for purchase of major capital items, such
as buses or building new facilities, that they
would want to see some sort of overall planning
document. In other words, some sort of assurance
that this isn't a fly-by-night type of thing.
These decisions are made within the parameters of
a well-thought-out growth document for transit
improvement. Same kinds of requirements that are
placed on highway improvements. I was asked to
temporarily take over the assignment of doing a
five-year transit development plan, a long range
transit plan for the city. What year was this? This
was 1974 that I took that over. That was when John
Hurtin was heading up UMTA in Washington, I
believe. He may have been, yeah. I really didn't at
that time pay too much attention paid too much mind
to who was heading up what. I dealt primarily with
the regional offices. And I got into it. I really
enjoyed it. I loved the transit work that I did. I
liked getting around all those buses. But all the
time, I thought this was only a temporary
assignment, and that eventually, a
transportation planner as opposed to a General
Staff Planner would be brought in to assume those
duties, and I would go back to my own duties as a
physical planner for the Advanced Planning or
Long Range Planning Division. And it didn't
happen. We ended up, Ernest created a
Transportation Planning Division within the
department and promoted me from Planner 1 to
Planner 2 to a Senior Planner, and there I stayed.
And I got involved in very few other planning
activities, but it did allow me the opportunity,
as someone not involved, to observe as an outsider
close to everything what was happening, since my
transportation plans, or the city's
transportation plans, was the only tool that we
could push planning programs through. Linus
Jamison was still part of the old Community of No
Program, and therefore there was still a lot of
resentment, I think, from the top down, of her
ideas on planning. Let me tell you, first of all,
that if we can put this planning in perspective,
Mr. Townsend's idea of a plan was the zoning
ordinance. In his opinion, and he had said many
times, we don't need a comprehensive plan, we have
one, and that's the zoning ordinance. The present
zoning. you can fully realize how that makes us
planners feel, knowing that that's very
noteworthy. That's a little surprising
considering the fact that he had undertaken a
substantial number of planning courses at
Cornell.
I think I can understand Mr. Townsend's point of
view to a certain extent. One of the things that I
believe bothered him about planning more than
anything else was that plans, in a sense,
suggested a commitment to do something further
down the road. than what the city manager was
willing to do, you know, to change various land
uses, to affect certain growth trends, to...
There was a difference in time frames. And he
didn't like these commitments, even though they
were just insinuated. And he was very afraid of the
fact, for example, if someone would bring in a
general land use plan and they'd look at it and say,
see, it's got some red there, and that meant you
promised back whenever you approved that plan You
promised that I was going to be able to develop that
property as commercial, and that wasn't the
intent of a plan. And as you know and I know, a plan
isn't worth the paper it's written on unless it's
flexible enough to meet the needs of the
community. And Mr. Townsend did not want to have to
deal with that kind of flexibility. Mr.
Townsend's idea of a planning function... He
sounds like he didn't want to deal with commitment
either, let alone flexibility.
Mr. Townsend's forte... finances as most
effective managers are understanding the
finances of the city that they run and it is a big
business and
his understanding of finances didn't fit any kind
of any kind of plan and his idea of planning or his
idea of what a planning department should do was to
provide management with information on a
day-to-day basis that they need for making a
decision. And if those planning kinds of
documents that we develop address what some of our
conditions would be 10, 15, 20 years down the road,
it didn't mean much to him because he wasn't
concerned about that. He was concerned about
capital improvements over a three-year period.
and next year. New York City went bankrupt with
such a short range perspective. I suppose you
could say that because Corpus Christi has been
such conservative in its administration and also
very conservative in its growth that in a way we
were inadvertently blessed in that we have
developed for appearances sake, as a
well-planned community. But what's really
happened is that we have been subjected to the
growth spurts that San Antonio's and Austin's and
Houston's and Dallas's have been, because if we
had, I think everything would have been well out of
control. And also that you've got to understand
the community itself, people who've lived here,
who are the leaders here, are very proud of this
city. They're very proud of the way it looks.
They're very proud of the fact that it's
considered an extremely clean city. And, you
know, I've heard people from the outside, very
professional people, like from New York, to say
that it's so clean it's sterile. And that's not
good. Well, I'm not sure whether that's good or
bad. I'm not even sure if I know what they mean by
sterile. I just know that We do have a lot more room
for growth. But yes, you're right about that's
what drove New York City into bankruptcy. But
we're not New York City. We're very small. We're a
population of around, we're a population in 1970
of 201,000, and we're a population in 1980 of
230,000. And the majority of that growth has
occurred over the last four years. Largely, what
do you attribute the growth to?
Well, I think the kind of growth that we have, our
growth is attributed primarily to natural
increases. We haven't been subjected to a heavy
in-migration of new people. I believe we're going
to be seeing that. I think that the job
opportunities in Corpus Christi are not that
good. The job opportunities that are here are in
the petroleum industry, usually for skilled type
of laborers. And the petroleum industry pretty
well takes care of that. And the other kinds of jobs
that are here, and on a much lesser scale, are in the
domestic area. People working in hotels and
restaurants and cleaners, et cetera. Tourists.
Yeah, people that are responding to the tourist
needs. Tourists is one of the major, if not the
major, industry approaches here. Our growth over
the past has been natural increases as opposed to a
migration trend. As a matter of fact, the
Community Renewal Program did a study in 1974,
which was what we entitled a Household Movement
Study, in which we documented that we were losing
people, people moving out, moving out primarily
to Houston and then to San Antonio. The only thing
that kept our population even, or with a very
minimal growth, was our natural increase. That
was a very controversial report. I bet it was.
Because it was telling the community leaders, the
Chamber of Commerce people, that people were
leaving. They couldn't, because the kinds of
people that were attracting, everyone wants to
attract these skilled laborers, the high-income
people. That's not it. This community doesn't
have that to offer. And maybe it will. It is of sorts
a very... favorite in the retirement area. It is
also a retirement community for a lot of the
elderly affluent people. Not people who live in
noble homes. No, not people who live in noble
homes. I think a lot of people who buy condominiums
and townhouses of sorts or apartments. The Navy,
for example, the Naval Air Station Facility,
which also includes an Army helicopter repair
depot, both of which employ a lot of civilians and a
lot of Navy personnel. These people are brought in
usually from the outside. They're highly skilled
people, and they enjoy it here. And when they
retire from those jobs, they stay here. And that's
where a lot of the retirement people come from. Or
people who have served here in the Navy or Army at
one time before in the past, and then they retire,
come back here because they like to. Did I lose my
train of thought here?
All right, picking up with Mr. McClendon. Mr.
McClendon was senior planner, hired a senior
planner from Oklahoma. I believe he had been a
director of planning for one of the small cities in
Oklahoma. I don't recall which one it was. Maybe it
was Lawton. I'm not sure. Graduate of the OU
planning program. very sound planner very good
person and if you ever if anyone knows bruce you
know that he is a what i consider a mover he was in
charge of planning and there was a little bit of
conflict when we made the transition here we have a
long-range planning division under the
direction of a senior planner doing long-range
planning work that bruce extremely capable of
doing and was working with her miss jameson being a
part of the Old Community Road Program and also
looking for a change and wanting to get, you know,
move forward. And as you said in the past, Bob,
people, planners, young, particularly young
planners, their advancement usually comes with
several jobs, not just staying with one city. And
Linna did. She left in 75, I believe, or 76, can't
remember exactly, and went up to Kansas City to
work for the planning office up there, and I
understand she's done very well. At the time,
prior to, I think one of the things that helped Ms.
Jameson leave was the fact that during her stay
here, although she wasn't demoted in any way,
Bruce was put in charge of her program as a senior
planner, and she became answerable to Bruce. And
professionally, I think she felt a little bit hurt
with regard to that. But Bruce was going to also was
very impressive in that he was going to provide a
new direction in planning, and I think the
management people, the administrators, the city
manager, Mr. Briones, all felt that he had what it
took to get the job done. And Bruce did. I've never
seen an office produce, a planning office produce
so many reports in such a short period of time.
Under Bruce's leadership, prepared and
published an updated economic study of the city of
Corpus Christi, physical determinants of land
use study for the city, and A very well-known
document among other professional planners is
what we call our housing element, but actually not
known at all. And the economic study, the housing
element, they all had policy-type statements in
it. And all these documents were a forerunner of
Bruce's ultimate plan of getting Planning
Commission and City Council to agree to allow the
staff to prepare for the city a comprehensive
plan. Now here we're coming back again. Mr.
Ewing's downfall, Mrs. Jameson's downfall, was
trying to be, was pressuring the preparation and
approval of a comprehensive plan. Now, and all of
which have been unsuccessful. And there's ways of
moving projects through an elected body and
there's ways of not doing it. I feel that I have the
political savvy of how to handle delicate
documents like that and not move them through so
quickly and help convince things that I have
picked up from Mr. Cunningham. And Bruce thought
that he could probably do it too. You know, he was a
gifted person as far as persuading people to do
things. And up until Bruce came in and started
doing this, The only thing that, as far as planning
documents that we had utilized, which were
approved, were the updates to the transportation
plans called annual reports. And we did that every
year. And again, it was a requirement. But it was an
effective requirement, and it kept us on target
with our long-range transportation plan codes.
But that wasn't enough. And I think the annual
reports began to deteriorate as time went on. And
they really never did deal with enough detail with
other elements of a comprehensive plan. And
that's what Bruce was trying to do. He was trying to
bring to the city an approved document that dealt
with housing, that dealt with community
facilities, that dealt with land uses, that dealt
with urban design. very important. You mentioned
the housing report. What is the status of that and
what is the cause of the status? You're probably a
little bit more familiar with the housing report
in that you had a lot to do in getting it started
under a program of a local section. It was an AIP
section at that time. Bruce brought in, and of
course Bruce was a real real big on continuing
education of our fellow planners in this area, and
you were brought down as an invited guest or
however, but you agreed to come down and you taught
basically a course here. I didn't get to take it,
but you taught a course here, and the project was to
do a plan summary, which the students or the staff,
the staff members were That was your participants
in the course. The kind of classic unified summary
for a comprehensive plan. That's right. As the
final examination of the course. And one of the
results of this course was a unified summary that
was tied to a housing element. And the housing
element is a large report. It's extremely well
done. It looks good. It was professionally
prepared and published. And there was a lot of arm
twisting to get it published. But it contained
within that housing element a lot of goals,
housing policies that actually, after it was done
and printed and Mr. Townsend looked at it, felt
that, well, I do not want, he did not personally
want to be held committed to those kinds of goals
and selling those goals to city councils as they
would change from year to year. And... I believe
there's about 150, 200 copies of that report that
were published. And Mr. McClendon tried in vain on
many occasions to get a formal and official
release of that report, which never came. And what
eventually happened is that for better or worse,
the report was boxed up and put back in storage. It
has always been the intention or at least Mr.
McLendon was told, that we want to eventually
release the report. We want to handle it in our own
time frame and as delicately as possible. I don't
believe it was ever the intention to pigeonhole
the report so no one could see it. It wasn't that
damage to the report, but it was very aggressive.
And it did set some long-range goals and
commendable goals, but it's also some very, very
strong objectives.
With your new city manager now, is there any effort
being made to conduct a review of that at the
planning commission level? Well, you have to
understand that the new city manager has only been
here several months, and at this moment, although
he seems to be an extremely sharp individual,
which he is, the reason he was hired, you could well
understand that what he's doing now is letting
things run as they had been under the leadership of
people that were in charge prior to Mr. Townsend.
And we did go through another major
reorganization under Townsend prior to his
departure, where before we had city manager
Marvin Townsend, assistant city manager, and
then four major department heads in charge of what
I call super departments. The new reorganization
effective down last year, we created that we had
city manager, deputy city manager, which Mr.
Briones was elevated to deputy city manager, and
four assistant city managers. And these
assistant city managers, this organizational
structure was in place, although very new, at the
time Mr. Martin, our new city manager, came on
board. And understandably, as I said earlier,
he's just going to sort of watch over things,
monitor it. He's made some critical decisions. We
have no feedback yet on what his feelings are about
planning. But I think after he's been there for
maybe six months to maybe a year, that he will start
bringing his own personal style of management And
I believe we'll see very shortly what his thoughts
are on planning. And of course, we keep our fingers
crossed as to hoping that he would allow us to move
forward in this direction. At this time, Mr.
Martin probably does not know or is not aware that
there is a housing element tucked away back in the
back somewhere.
And he may or may not be impressed with it. I don't
know. It's hard to say. But in the meantime, this
department seeing as what happened to other
planters. It's very important to understand that
what Bruce and what Linus and what the Kern Ewings
all tried to do was extremely commendable. It was
done very well. And it was done, for the most part, a
losing cause. And the only people who lose,
really, is the city and the planning department,
our own goals. Mr. McLendon had since left and went
become director of planning at Galveston, and now
he's currently the director of planning of the
city of Beaumont. And Linda Jamison left, and she
got a much higher paying position with the city of
Kansas, Kansas City, and she's doing extremely
well. But the real losers is the city, and I think we
as planners are trying to do more of Well, we're
going to try another approach. You've got to keep
trying. And this time it's a little bit more
low-key. We're not pressing long-range
planning. We are implying it. We're bringing it in
slowly. This department and our staff have become
very responsive to short-range needs. We have
taken our emphasis on long-range planning and
applied it to the neighborhoods. We do not use a
2,000-year plan. or a 2002-year plan, a 20-year
plan. We don't go by that anymore. We have an
ultimate plan. And we have five-year
improvements, priorities. And so in one sense,
what is the ultimate plan? An ultimate plan is what
our concept of what the city is going to look like
when it's ultimately developed. Where is this
plan housed? This plan happens to be compromise to
the unified summary prepared by your class. It was
our way of saving it. And what we have done, we have
calculated out all the different types of land
uses and impacts it would have on the city's growth
if they should be developed. We've incorporated
into it densities, housing densities that we
need, commercial properties, etc. And we've also
go back into using, we've done this under the
auspices of the transportation plan again
because One of the things we're required to do in
order to continue highway improvements is to
maintain the 20-year plan. So we have to do our
traffic assignments for the year 2000. Where is
this ultimate plan? Well, the ultimate plan is
about 50% through, and we've done it by planning
area. as El Paso did, and Kern, you know, since Kern
came from El Paso and I came from El Paso, we set up
the city in basically five planning areas, and we
worked primarily in the two planning areas that
were most critical, most of, you know, the ones
that were subjected to the most growth, and that's
the northwest planning area and the southeast
planning area. We have at this point nothing
published, but we do have all of our
documentations and materials. That's not in
there. No, this here is our transportation study
area with our traffic zones. And these are our
sectors. And although this really does not relate
to our planning area. Well, the name Ultimate Plan
fascinates me because it is unique in the animals
and plants to have a document called Ultimate.
That I find interesting. We may find it more
interesting than you think after we get caught up
with the language. It's a word selection game,
really. Ultimate seems to be more acceptable to
other people than, let's say, a plan that says 1980
or 1990 plan. A lot of people are still afraid, as
far as from the administrator's point of view,
that a plan implies a commitment to do certain
things. That's why in my classes now, I encourage
the students to think in terms of horizons that are
not time horizons, but population horizons.
Well, exactly. And if you have X people, then you
have this sort of thing happening. We reject in the
Corpus Christi area. Well, we do have some
rejections that carry us through 20 years.
346,000 by the year 2000. we use that kind of
population target to identify the kinds of
services will be needed to address those
population needs. But the timing is very
flexible, and it's of very little consequence.
One of the things we accomplished, and I think this
is interesting, and I don't know if we have
compromised our own